welcome back everyone to another episode
of the China history podcast Lazlo
Montgomery coming to you for the 250
times you know lately immigration has
been more of a front and center issue
than usual here in the US as I record
this anyway for many of us who think
these times we live in are so cold and
heartless well historically it's really
sort of business as usual a new chapter
and an old story we tend to view things
through the prism of events that happen
in our own lifetime or maybe as far back
as the generation before us yeah that's
the history most familiar to us but
history has been repeating and rhyming
for as long as it's been recorded and so
I wanted to tell you a story from the
annals of Chinese American history it
takes place during the exclusion years
1882 to 1943 the backstory for these
times have been told and retold and
passed CHP episodes this tale had a
twist to it that sort of appealed to me
that is the story took place in a rather
obscure part of a state that you know
usually doesn't get the top billing it
deserves when discussing Chinese
American history that's right I'm
talking about the beaver State the ninth
biggest state in the country admitted to
the Union on Valentine's Day 1859 the
state of Oregon but our story doesn't
take place in the chinatown of Portland
or anywhere near the Pacific coast now
this one takes place 260 miles to the
east in that Geographic slice of Oregon
sandwiched in between the Umatilla and
malheur national forests the closest
city that may come to mind round those
parts isn't even in Oregon it's Walla
Walla Washington baseball fans might
have heard of that place it's a
three-hour drive to the north from where
our story takes place about a 30 hour
drive to Kalamazoo the locus of this
episode is the town of John Day Oregon
John Day
was an American trapper and hunter who
made a name for himself during his years
up in the Pacific Northwest
that is Oregon Washington Idaho western
Montana and southern British Columbia
Canada now for someone not terribly
well-known he sure had a lot of places
named after him most famous would be the
John Day River the third longest
free-flowing River in the lower 48
states
it's a tributary of the Columbia
free-flowing
that means nothing gets in its way no
dams or anything
there's also de Ville Oregon 31 miles to
the west and de Ville isn't too far from
the John Day Fossil Beds National
Monument on the John Day highway you
can't miss it
some of you may recall CHP 194 the
episode on the history of twice Sun and
us immigration now the two men I wanted
to focus on today came from there and no
surprise in the early days the toys on
Chinese comprised the largest majority
by far of the Chinese diaspora who came
to the US today's heroes are mr. inhe a
mr. long on or Leon Kwang wrong in
Mandarin in Hayes gravestone says his
name was Warren yen and he was born
Ching Tung her Union that is during the
first year of the Ching dynasty tonsure
Emperor's reign or 1863 in shopping
village these two men in hae and long on
they had a rather special story and
thanks to the love and efforts of a
whole bunch of Oregonians committed to
preserving their legacy a lot of this
tale is well documented so let's relive
the experience of these two toys on
immigrants and how together they built
their American Dream not on Mott Street
not on Grand Street or Alameda Street
they did it out in Eastern Oregon in a
town I'm betting most of you that never
heard of prior to just now let's look at
any hey his story about how he ended up
on a steamer to gold mountain is as
unspectacular as 19th century Chinese
immigration stories go like almost
everyone how
he followed in the footsteps of some
male relatives who probably left in the
aftermath of the horrors of the Taiping
rebellion and all the other natural and
man-made disasters that struck southern
China in the 1860s and 1870s these male
relatives or uncle's of inhaie as the
legend has it were also under suspicion
by the Ching authorities for their
alleged anti Manchu activities whatever
the case may be they blaze the familiar
trail worked in mining and railroads
established themselves in the United
States and when they had cash flow they
wrote back to the village and taesan and
said it was safe for others to follow
sometime in the early 1880s when
anti-chinese rhetoric was reaching a
crescendo and the Chinese Exclusion Act
was becoming reality inhe and his father
headed towards the u.s. west coast and
then on to Walla Walla Washington where
these five uncle's had set themselves up
in hey and his father started their
American adventure in 1883 how they
managed to slip through the exclusion
net it's hard to say one theory has it
they probably entered the country in
Port Townsend north of Seattle no word
on the street was that this port of
entry was a lot more relaxed than
dealing with the federal authorities
down in the big cities it had been just
shy of 80 years since Lewis and Clark
had passed through those parts but it
was still very much a frontier and all
that that entailed weathering hey got to
walla walla by this way or not it's hard
to say for sure Canada had also become a
reliable launching pad for a future life
in America and there were plenty of toys
on operatives who were in the business
of sneaking prospective Americans into
the country everyone knows all about the
California Gold Rush that began in 18-49
Sutter's Mill they had their own gold
rush in both East and West Oregon that
happened the same time 1850s in 1855
they had a big one in Idaho to thaw
all Pacific Northwest in fact mid 19th
century you could say lots of gold
mining going on and because of this
dynamic a lot of the early
infrastructure that came to those parts
and opened it up and Network that land
with the states east of there came about
primarily as a result of gold mining and
this infrastructure gave a lot of these
frontier regions enough traction to
reach critical mass and become
full-fledged communities now the quarter
century lasting from 1860 to 1885 those
were the peak years for Chinese
settlement in Oregon California that was
a crowded and very mature market to try
and make one's fortune or again the next
state to the north that place presented
all kinds of opportunities Portland and
Seattle were thriving but the eastern
third of Oregon that was still some
rough country there was also a safe
amount of distance between these parts
and the worst of the anti Chinese
violence that was happening in all that
china towns of the coastal cities that
isn't to say Eastern Oregon was a safe
place for Chinese it wasn't the stories
of lynchings massacres and random acts
of murder and other forms of violence
were common in these still largely
lawless places a favorite pastime for
some of the locals was to get all
liquored up and ride out to the closest
Chinatown or Chinese mining village and
shoot the place up countless unmarked
graves are scattered over the whole
Pacific Northwest of the United States
of mostly toys on immigrants and
laborers random acts of violence wrong
place wrong time they never made it back
to Guangdong in the most extreme case
from the history books over in Hell's
Canyon on the Snake River the border of
Oregon and Idaho
that's the northeast corner of Oregon in
the Walla WA Whitman National Forest
there's a monument to a massacre of 34
Chinese miners minding their own
business panning for gold in these
remote parts some ruffians came upon
and shot them all in cold blood every
single one of them and like with the
case of Vincent chin up in Detroit and
June 1982 nothing happened to the
killers they got off easy the monuments
would that marks the spot of the
massacre says he ba ba Chi nian
Sandshrew domine Jean Quan Wacom sites
on Sasha Luke Church in Warren root say
this is the site of the 1887 massacre of
as many as 34 Chinese gold miners no one
was held accountable in a well-worn path
followed by many immigrants to this
country including my own family inhe
ended up wherever he had the safety net
of a family in his case that was out in
Walla Walla and I guess you could say
that pretty much sealed his fate as far
as where he was destined to carve out a
life now thanks to Walla Walla 'he's
relative central location to where all
the mining operations were happening in
the Pacific Northwest it was quite a
boomtown back in the 1800s wherever
there was a boomtown there was always a
budding Chinese immigrant community
getting a piece of the action
while the wala was no exception
thousands of Chinese called that place
home in hey surname as I said was now
that wool surname in Cantonese was
pronounced mmm ng no vowels to help you
out with that surname and for that
reason here in the land of the free home
of the brave most people with this
surname in the American dialect well
they just became kings and there were
plenty of ings spread out all over late
19th century Washington and Oregon
although these ings already in the u.s.
weren't blood relatives
technically inhe could claim he was from
the same clan Chinese immigrants tended
to separate themselves into these kinds
of sub communities and if you couldn't
find anyone with the same surname and
the next best things to have come from
the same village
it created a bond where nothing existed
before and in these faraway places with
so many people
inherently hostile to Asian immigrants
now there was strength and support in
numbers so they all hung out with their
own inhe from about 1883 to 1887 he did
the whole full-course meal of cool eat
bitter labor that's where we get the
word he did it all this thirst
for Chinese labor out in Oregon and
Idaho and in Washington was almost
insatiable even during the dark days of
the 1870s when a lot of Americans were
hating on the Chinese in the Pacific
Northwest well they couldn't do without
them so they were quite welcome suddenly
one day in Hayes father said yeah he had
had enough and he was gonna cash out and
return to China now we'll never know why
but in 1887 after his father had left
inhe decided to bid his while a wallet
uncle's a fun to do and south he went in
the direction of another thriving
boomtown in Eastern Oregon called Canyon
City the county seat of Grant County not
a lot going on there today but when
inhaie arrived on the scene the place
was still hoppin when Inca arrived in
John Day Oregon
it wasn't called John Day yet the town
was quite new in the year 1880 it was
the third largest Chinatown in the US
over 2000 Warren Chinese called the
place their home away from home all the
Chinese living there comprised the
majority at first they called the place
new town for lack of any other suitable
name the location for my fellow American
skis and any foreign tourists is where
the US route 26 meets the 395 the three
flags highway I kid you not the 395
terminates in the South less than an
hour away from where I'm recording this
so US highways 26 and 395 where those
two roads meet up in Eastern Oregon
that's where the story of inkay and
long-on begins I mentioned inhe went to
a place called Canyon City that was
where all the action was and where a lot
of Chinese resided well the Canyon City
Chinatown
got burned down a common hazard amongst
the Chinese immigrants and when the
Chinese inhabitants there tried to
rebuild all the sudden there were you
know no Chinese allowed signs everywhere
so some didn't want any trouble and
moved to Idaho and someone to Washington
and others like Inge hey they walked
about 45 minutes north to the John Day
River where many Chinese had already
migrated to long-on he got the John Day
before in Hey and so already had the lay
of the land how to describe him and his
photos long on looks unremarkable but he
can only be described as a fearless
go-getter someone with long term vision
a real force of nature a ramblin gamblin
man and he had been educated back in
China during his youth he had read and
understood the classics he could read
and write classical Chinese was very
skillful in calligraphy he understood
the e Ching and brought all that
classical wisdom to the frontier not
sure when but people started calling him
Leon the other distinguishing
characteristic about long-on was that in
his short time in America maybe five
years only he had been able to pick up
English and spoke it quite well and he
could read and write too in hay on the
other hand he spoke that pidgin English
you know you've heard in a hundred
movies so long on it a much easier time
navigating the rickety bridge that
joined his Chinese race with the white
settlers of the mountains hills and
forests of Eastern Oregon
and because of his fluency in English
long run had made himself useful to the
man he was often sought out as a
translator for all kinds of US customs
and immigration matters involving the
Chinese when inkay rolled into town long
on latched on to him quite quickly first
of all they were both toys on guys now
that was one bonding agent but well
truthfully all these laborers laundry
men miners and cooks they were mostly
all toys on anyway the ink LAN in the
these parts Southeast Washington
southwest Idaho northeast Oregon the
ings were quite well represented so for
a leg like long on to plug himself into
the Inc LAN through a relationship with
inhae had its distinct advantages
especially where business was concerned
long on also learned that inhe seemed to
be quite familiar with Joey
TCM traditional Chinese medicine this
was true in hey he learned it up in
Walla Walla from another Chinese named
doc Lee doc Lee who knows how but he had
acquired some repute out in that wild
country as a healer of sorts but the one
thing that doc Lee was particularly
adept at and what he taught inhe was
pulse ology my John I'm not sure how
many have you ever heard of that when
you query it's in Wikipedia there isn't
even an entry now I googled the term as
well and didn't get too terribly much
back there are a ton of documented
anecdotes about his skills as a pulse
ologist that made it down to our day
they all went something like this
doc hey felt my pulse figured out my
illness prescribed me some herbs and I
was cured he had this special gift and
whatever this forgotten Chinese
immigrant doc Lee taught in hey he
brought it to John Day Oregon and this
amazing skill and ability turned him
into a legend in TCM traditional Chinese
medicine there are 12 to 14 pulses each
one is located in a certain part of your
body and corresponds to a specific organ
so by measuring these 14 pulses you
could discover what has gone awry inside
you your lungs bladder stomach heart
liver whatever in hae had mastered this
he'd take his three fingers on his right
hand feel the pulses of these patients
and he knew he knew exactly what was
wrong with them and he had just the
concoction perfected over the centuries
to cure this ailment
furthermore in hay from his days back in
the home village and toys on supposedly
he picked up a few good pharmacology
tips and I guess he knew his BUN
touching a part of his legend purports
that he actually came from a long line
of Chinese herbalists so long on saw in
in a someone who hit a unique and deadly
necessary skill set that could do quite
well out on the frontier so these two
unlikely partners one outgoing and
boisterous the other a bit more reserved
join together in business and set
themselves up in a building that became
known as the gum watch own the gene
watch hung golden flower prosperity that
was the building that ink hay operated
out of and saw patience long on and inge
hey both live there as well I guess
yeah you could call it a a multi-use
structure small as it was it was their
office was where they lived it was a
general store that sold Chinese goods
and all manners of frontier necessities
of life that included such commodities
as tobacco and booze the number one
sellers there the gum watch on also had
a no frills in for Chinese laborers
passing through town who you know needed
a place to flop but they stuck they
stuck four in a bed there you could buy
lottery tickets at the gum watch on hit
along on he ran his own lottery the
place was also a makeshift gambling and
opium den a favorite pastime of Chinese
miners I guess he could say it was also
a giass house and contained a shrine for
Buddhist to pray at hing hay was very
devout and with his many Chinese living
in and around John Day like there were
well this building simply became like
you know like the Elks Lodge or the
local YMCA this is where all the local
Chinese they would hang and long on had
an old Victrola there that always had
some Chinese opera recordings going in
any company or organization look into
higher Chinese
Labour's came to come watch young to do
the recruiting for miles around this was
the center of the Chinese immigrant
population and long-on made a little
spare change on all the transactions he
got involved in for this reason and for
his innate business and investment
skills he died a very wealthy man now
the medical side of the business was
quite lucrative
most of these towns that sprang up
during the second half of the 19th
century didn't have the luxury of their
own town doctor so if you got sick or
injured yeah you were on your own but
the town of John Day had decay in time
his abilities to cure patients using
these well in the eyes of the people
there these unfamiliar but effective
Chinese folk remedies achieved quite a
bit of renown out in Eastern Oregon
you know advanced medicine as we know it
today is well if you follow the timeline
going back to Hippocrates it's a fairly
recent phenomenon I mean even in my own
children's lifetime medicine has come
such a long way but prior to the 20th
century in Incas time let's say medicine
and surgery were still pretty backward
and horrific now I'm not saying being a
doctor was a blue-collar job but well it
required a lot of experience and skill
because there simply wasn't enough known
at that time so many things we take for
granted like you know sterilization for
example nobody knew about that down the
frontier at least so when you got sick
back then or worse injured or hit some
kind of an infection no Western medicine
didn't have such a great track record
and if it was something that required
you to go under the knife when I was
practically a death sentence in and of
itself but in hey he had absorbed a good
amount of this 2,000 year old
accumulated heritage of Chinese medicine
and brought it to the Oregon frontier
and the people no matter their race or
religion we're quite glad to have X
to it they might have found the Cure's
bitter and foul-tasting and
uncomfortable as can be but for most of
the ailments aches and pains that
happened out in that rough and rugged
part of the beaver state in hey this
china doctor as he came to be called man
he had a treatment that worked his
friend and partner long on was a major
mother in the MSA yup association you
remember to say yup from that tyson
episode the suit ii the four contiguous
counties of xin kwai tai shan Kaiping
and unpin this say yup association or
tong let's serve the same purpose out in
those parts of eastern oregon that
tongues of any chinatown did so he was
always being sought out and was a giant
fish and what was a relatively small
pond compared to san fran and other
urban Chinatown's
so when we think of the Chinese
immigration experience and how gold was
the driving force behind its early
history 1850s to the 1880s those were
the boom years gold mines the railroads
the connecting of America about halfway
into the 1880s though came the bust
1890s and right into the turn of the
century the good times were over and
know plenty of Chinese still scratched
around for gold dust and whatever hadn't
been picked clean yet most migrated to
the next great thing out west which was
ranching that was as labor-intensive job
as there ever was and so perfect for the
Chinese immigrants trying to sell their
muscles to the highest bidders so some
went in that direction and worked on the
ranches there was also work to be found
and you know commercial agriculture
domestic service and you know the salmon
tanneries many other John Day Basin EES
made their way west to Portland OR
Seattle where there were already
thriving mature China towns to rely on
for safety and support those times
after the bust it was a difficult time
for everyone not just Chinese immigrants
some of these men from Tyson and all
parts of the Pearl River Delta region
who couldn't find work and still hadn't
managed to acquire their fortune they
couldn't return to China I mean the
humiliation would be too great this
group had it especially rough his
suicides were a common exit strategy for
many men who weren't able to make their
American dreams happen over in John day
at the GaN hua Chong long on and inhe
saw firsthand how the numbers in this
once thriving chinese community began
slowly melting away there wasn't
anything left there at least not enough
to keep the Chinese workers from leaving
and moving on to the next thing by 1900
less than a hundred Chinese called John
Day home by 1940 there were fewer than a
couple dozen this wasn't the only town
west of the Continental Divide that met
this fate but John Day was a pretty
well-documented example of one such town
that rode the Gold Rush all the way to
the top and then all the way down it was
no doubt said for eing hay and long-on
to witness the decline of this once
thriving Chinese community and John Day
in its heyday this band of brothers who
all came from Guangdong Province they
all used to congregate together there in
some stayed a few years or only for a
few nights
and it was usually at the gum watch on
this old wooden structure they would all
come and you know sort of hung out
speaking their toys on dialects being
themselves immersed in their familiar
culture but at the same time living on
the edge in these parts of the West far
off the beaten path followed by most of
their countrymen each year the numbers
got smaller but the gum watch own remain
the center of that tiny community has
diminished as it was as I said in past
episodes where I
slices of Chinese American history some
immigrants came only for the fortune to
be made and once that was done their
plans were to return to China but they
were those who after they arrived and
got settled saw the possibilities and
weighed them against the sorry state of
affairs and late Qing Dynasty China and
figured they'd take their chances in
this brave new world that was in hey and
long on most of their Chinese colleagues
and countrymen who they had come to know
during the 1880s and 90s had mostly all
bailed but they stayed and don't forget
from 1882 on they were living under the
stigma and inconvenience of the Chinese
Exclusion laws that was all playing out
in the background to exacerbate the
hideous fate of many early Chinese
immigrants as far as their apothecary
business long on continued to help in
hay mix the herbs and roots and whatnot
and got everything packaged and
dispatched to patients in hay at about
500 different prescriptions Chinese
medicine had been more than a thousand
years of careful observation trial and
error that had preceded everything
further perfected by Inge hay out on the
frontier I mean he wasn't just making
this stuff up the Western people who
came to inkay continued to believe these
strange treatments to be miracle cures
now they might have been miracles out on
the Oregon frontier the early 1900s but
in China these had been common
treatments going back to the Tong
dynasty people knew of inkay and the CIM
Wachau from hundreds of miles around
from Washington State down to Nevada
word had spread about in hey skills as a
doctor and the afflicted came from every
direction but some couldn't come so what
people used to do back then in these pre
webmd.com times they'd mail a letter to
Inge hey and do their best to describe
their symptoms now
on would read these letters and then in
hey would do his best to diagnose what
was wrong and together with long on
they'd mix up some ingredients and mail
that to the patient and long on being
more educated and literate of the two in
English
he was always tasked with writing up the
instructions to the patient and this
mail-order drug business became quite
lucrative and steady and a lot of times
it involved just refilling prescriptions
to old patients and dropping them in the
mail after 1910 well there simply
weren't enough Chinese left in and
around John Day to make a living but in
hate did very well making the transition
from treating primarily Chinese laborers
to the non Chinese who populated that
part of America as long I knew back when
he met Inge hey there was a big market
for these services blood poisoning
happened to be one of the more common
afflictions in those parts
that's the non medical term for
bacteremia and septicemia in TCM
traditional chinese medicine who was on
the cutting edge back then old as it was
in treating these killer infections in
some cases so spectacular would be the
comeback for the patients that it would
become one of the many stories people
would tell and get passed around I mean
there were a lot of tales some tall
tales I'm guessing of some of ink as
more miraculous comeback patients that
besides blood poisoning other common
maladies back in that day and those
hinterlands were meningitis lower back
pain mumps colds Rocky Mountain spotted
fever stomach problems and one other big
one that was influenza and there were
two deadly outbreaks of influenza 1915
and 1919 now of the 500 million people
around the world who were affected by
the 1919 flu or Spanish flu a lot of
them caught it in Eastern Oregon three
to five percent of the world's
population at that time right at the
conclusion of World War
one perished from this outbreak but as
the story goes none of them were eating
Hayes patients there was a story about
how during the height of this the
Spanish flu pandemic outbreak when
people were dropping like flies in hay
and long-on mixed up a massive batch of
Chinese medicinal herbs and took them
around the vicinity of John Day and
other places where there were large
populations of laborers building roads
and tunnels and it said all of those who
were treated with doc Hays foul-tasting
medicine they survived when everyone
else perished from this virus house
calls were common sometimes it meant
eing hay and long on driving long
distances and very nasty weather here
long on used to do the driving at first
by you know horse and buggy and later on
by automobile the years wore on and
after so many lives had been saved and
so many debilitating ailments had been
cured and after so many legends and
stories have been passed around the
Pacific Northwest about in haze ability
to diagnose and treat any disease just
by feeling one's pulse I mean he he had
become downright revered a revered and
respected physician in a land well back
then at least where most physicians
opted to pass on you know perhaps
because of the rough living the the
prospects and the clientele but a
Chinese immigrant from toei son he
stayed and served that community let me
quote from China doctor of John de
Jeffery Barlow and Christine Richardson
quote he was one of the last horse and
buggy doctors in the John Day area like
other old-fashioned doctors he became
almost part of the family he would go to
remote places to treat people and remain
at their bedside until their suffering
was relieved
unlike many old-time doctors he could
cure many fatal illnesses he truly
embodied the ideal of the immigrant who
had come to stay he brought
his old country's training and skills to
a new land and practiced the healing
arts among a strange but in the end
friendly people and quote as the 20th
century progressed and as parts of the
frontier became more settled other
Western physicians came and set up their
practice there so we hae was no longer
the only game in town for treatment and
these Western doctors would sometimes
collude to put all kinds of pressures on
inhe such as you know getting his
practice shut down for licensing issues
or for some infraction or another his
the share price of Western medicine rose
when a Chinese medicine declined
he continued to operate out of the gum
watch own building that was long on and
in Hays Googleplex all in one campus
long unmanaged his whole business empire
from there his investments and stocks
and bonds
he had real estate holdings throughout
the Pacific Northwest including in
British Columbia he bought patents for
all kinds of devices and gadgets and as
soon as the car became King in America
he opened up the first auto dealership
in Eastern Oregon and it doubled as an
old-fashioned filling station - and it
was called the tourist garage they
continued to run their mail-order
Chinese medicine business being a
continued to see patients and it never
ceased to amaze these frontiersman how
his delicate fingers could feel certain
pulses in their body and from these
sensations invisible to most humans he
could pick them up and he knew he knew
where the problem was some of the
techniques he used went all the way back
to the huangdi neijing the inner cannon
of the Yellow Emperor this ancient and
classic work is attributed to the
mythical Yellow Emperor Huangdi it
actually came out during either the late
warring States or early Han now that war
contained the state of the art as far as
where Chinese medicine was at that time
the huangdi neijing was the first or one
of the first works to break from the
unscientific beliefs about what caused
disease
and instead used careful observation and
other more scientific methods to
diagnose an illness here in this huangdi
neijing it stated everything about the
body is all related to the yin yang Chi
and the washing the five elements wood
fire earth metal water yeah in a brought
this knowledge and expertise from the
heartland of ancient China to the
mountains and valleys of Eastern Oregon
in the late 18-hundreds and into the
1900s because of the whole history of
early Chinese immigration the way it all
panned out with labor driving the whole
process and then the exclusion laws
kicking in when they did well the ratio
of Chinese men to women in the u.s. was
quite unfavorable to a bachelor trying
to get hooked up with a Chinese wife so
this created an entire subculture among
these men about you know how they coped
with it long on despite the huge frown
and American societies faced about the
mixing of the races crossed over all the
time and enjoyed relationships with
Caucasian women you know he was someone
who had a personality he spoke perfect
English he had a gift for the gab he had
money I mean you could stop right after
a good personality and that's often
enough for some people so long on yeah
he was a player but he and in-hae they
never married they never had kids
so those two they built quite a life for
themselves but in true first-generation
immigrant fashion till their last days
they lived quite humbly and frugally I
mean if you walked into the gum watchong
and saw them I mean you wouldn't know
they'd be worth millions and you know
our day's dollars but they did it in hey
and long on they came they created value
and brought their collective smarts wits
and skills to apart the u.s. that was
still in its early development stages
and they thrived they decided at the
beginning they were gonna stay and both
saw Assam
elation is the only path to acceptance
and they won that acceptance something
that wasn't so easy you know coming from
Asia like they did so they both came and
they both stayed they never went back to
China you could say iing hey and long on
both cut the cord I mean the proper
thing to do and their culture anyway was
to you know send remittances back to
their village I mean they both had
families wife kids and of course it was
appropriate to sail back and visit every
now and then these two guys left never
look back they transported all those
thousands of years of Chinese culture
with them to this new land and they
wrapped themselves up in this culture
and it was part of them till their dying
days but at the same time they had
become Americans let me quote from a
letter sent to long-on in March 1905
from someone back in the village back in
Thai sign this was typical of the kind
of missives they'd get all the time
quote two years ago your mother passed
away last year your daughter married
your aged father is paralyzed he will
pass away soon your wife feels neglected
the neighbors are moved by her
melancholy and ill fortune come back as
soon as you receive this and if you
don't return you should send money home
for your family's expenses end quote wow
talk about a guilt trip
how should long honour felt after
receiving something like that well he
had his reasons I guess you know this
was Chinese Exclusion time and even
legal citizens like Eng hae and long-on
had to deal with the whole complicated
and risky process of getting out of and
getting back into the United States and
being Chinese at the same time they
stayed put too many stories had been
heard about Chinese American citizens
who made the mistake of trusting the
system only to find out when they came
back to the United States the door was
locked and it stayed this way til 1943
like thousands of others and their
similar situations stretching
Los Angeles Boston and back again in hey
and long-on were loyal supporters of Sun
yat-sen in past episodes I've mentioned
this a lot of Sun yat-sen's early
efforts to create a new Chinese Republic
were bankrolled by overseas Chinese
including these two living out in the
eastern wilds of the beaver state in
April 1940 long gone died his gravestone
says he was born in Shanghai in 1863 so
that made him 77 years old at the time
of his death he left everything to doc
hey I mean they had been a team for more
than half a century well with the
passing of his closest and most trusted
friend and it was pretty much the
beginning of the end for in hey I guess
he could say his health already wasn't
what it used to be his eyesight had
dimmed to the point where he was legally
blind
he had depended on long on for so much
not only in his medical and pharmacy
practice but for his English skills as
well inhe was left with only one place
to turn to word got out to some of young
Hayes relatives living out in that part
of the country a nephew EB wing stepped
up and arranged for his brother located
conveniently in Idaho to head to John
Day and take care of him hey now this
brother named Bob wah just by chance was
also a trained herbalist so he had that
in common with Eng hay and sorta took
over this business and Bob moved his
whole family lock stock and barrel to
John Day and in this perfect kind of
environment in hay lived out his days
long on in a whole gang of toys on ink
die or brothers who orbited the gum
watching for so many years they had been
in Hays family all his adult life they
were all gone but now inhe got to enjoy
the pleasures of being a yeah yeah a
grandpa of his own family adopted though
it was he continued to live at the gum
watch own building
Bob wah and family lived just down the
street of bed inhe wasn't in the
position to treat patients any longer
but believe it or not the mail-order
Chinese medicinal herbs business
continued to be brisk but with the
outbreak of the second sino-japanese war
in 1937 World War two the supply chain
for Chinese herbs was impacted
profoundly so Inge hay spent most of his
time inside the gum watch on building
Bob wah and his family looked after him
until Bob's wife Rose passed away and
the kids left John day to build a life
elsewhere for Inge hey his end came in a
familiar fashion that spelled the demise
of so many of the elderly
he was alone at home and fell and broke
his hip this was a 1948 Bob wattle come
to a hospital and Portland and then
after that ordeal he placed in hay in an
old folks home there that's wearing hay
lived out the rest of his days when he
drove away from the gum hwa-jung that
night after falling and breaking his hip
he didn't know that he'd never see that
place again he lived in that nursing
home in Portland for four years people
came to visit him but you know how it is
it was a lot of sitting around and
thinking about his past life he fell
again in 1952 and due to neglect by the
nursing home staff he died from
pneumonia after being left on a cold
metal table inside an examining room
well 1862 to 1952
that's almost 90 years not a bad run for
a former opium smoker and cigar addict
as for the gum watch young young hey
didn't die broke but he also didn't have
that much left from what long on had
bequeathed to him the gum watch on
building went to Bob wah who deeded it
to the city of John Day in 1955 he had
asked the city to turn it into some sort
of museum to show posterity the
contribution of the Chinese immigrants
to the area yeah just got forgotten was
all boarded up well Bob passed away in
1966 his second wife who got to claim
the dubious distinction of being John
days last Chinese resident moved away to
San Francisco and that was the end of
that the building became one of those
familiar eyesores we've all seen in some
of our towns and cities and people
wondered who owns that place well one
day in 1967 someone in the city at John
Day chanced upon some documents that
showed that in fact the city owned the
gun watch owned it's a whole bunch of
good people and local organizations
mobilized and went inside and no kidding
everything was just as inhe had left it
in 1948 when Bob Hwa drove him to the
hospital in Portland to get his hip
treated I guess he was sure he'd be
coming back so whatever he had pending
stayed that way for nineteen years the
same food offerings were sitting before
his little Buddhist shrine so everything
inside was studied photographed
catalogued and lovingly and
painstakingly put back together by a
whole big group of lovers of Oregon
history who have demonstrated the most
heartfelt and loyal commitment to
preserving this amazing legacy of inhe
long on and all the other Chinese
immigrants who were part of this amazing
story and since pretty much the entirety
of their story could be told
inside that gum watching structure it's
been put back together and turned into a
museum and State Heritage Site let me
read a few excerpts from Eng Hays
obituary dated January 25th 1952 from
the Blue Mountain Eagle Grand County's
newspaper since 1868 quote in doc hay is
dead with his death in Portland last
Saturday a symbol of a past and colorful
era in Grant County history passed on
doc Hays life in Grant County is so
interwoven with the old mining history
and the history of the Chinese colony
and Eastern Oregon that there are
hundred
of stories and anecdotes brought to
light by his passing because he always
avoided publicity and talked little of
the past even to relatives much of the
lore of his life has been lost when the
Chinese Exclusion Act was about to be
enacted and Doc had to prove residents
to establish citizenship he went to
Walla Walla and obtained an electors
certificate to establish his status this
certificate bears the date of July 31st
1897 and attested that he had voted in
an election there prior to that date his
ability as a Chinese herb doctor became
legendary in Eastern Oregon stories are
recounted of the early days when he
would travel as far as Prineville by
horse and buggy to treat patients among
the contents of the old store where the
docs spent his last year's our papers
letters and uncounseled checks all of
which provided a rich storehouse of
research material in studying the early
days of the county among this material
are uncanny lux many of them dating back
to the 1900s mostly in small amounts and
written by many pioneers of the county
now gone the amount of uncashed checks
is estimated to total close to $20,000
end quote
in hay the arc of his long life when he
got to witness firsthand the post
Taiping rebellion mess that china became
he was part of that great Chinese
diaspora of the late 1800s he lived
through all that too and he made it to
the presidency of Harry s Truman he got
to see quite a bit of history in his
lifetime and played his small role in
the history of the American West at a
time when it was on the cusp of being
linked up with mainstream America but in
each time it was still a wild and
violent frontier he and other Chinese
put on a brave face during Chinese
Exclusion and despite the odds being a
long on and others too whose stories are
yet to be told
they came they stayed
they built a life then here these two
friends died both inhe and long-on were
interred at John Day Cemetery don't by
the way they were both members of the
Order of Freemasons and in hay and log
on both had Masonic funerals the primary
source for this episode was written by
the late dr. Jeffrey Barlow and his wife
and partner Christine Richardson the
book is called China doctor of John Day
I found it online at Half Price Books
you can order it from the gum hua Chong
museum website too
I'll have all those links on my webpage
as usual I might add if you google doc
hey or gum hua Chong there are actually
a lot of videos and whatnot that take
you inside and explain a lot of
interesting stuff about these two guys
and the times they lived in the gum
watch own building got itself written
into the National Register of Historic
Places in 1973 and then 32 years later
in 2005 it was designated a national
historic landmark
so thank you everyone who indulge me on
this episode I hope it met with your
general approval
I want to thank good old Anita leeming
she / an NYC for bringing ink hey - my
attention
Anita's a big-time TCM doctor there and
let me say 39 years ago when I first
started studying Mandarin at the
University of Illinois she was my
classmate thanks Anita and a shout out
to my man
Jeffrey summer representing my favorite
city in the south Gainesville Georgia
Jeffrey's one of my top listeners and
not only Gainesville but I believe all
of Hall County Jeffery summer a loyal
CHP listener thanks Jeffrey I hope you
all enjoyed this episode that showcased
the great state of Oregon you know this
really isn't one of the state's claims
to fame but the Moors Lee and Rob they
write produce and present the history of
Chinese literature podcast out of that
place you know who else yeah
the Elvis and Beatles come by
end of history podcasters Dan Carolyn
beaver state and this isn't for certain
but it might possibly be the future home
of laszlo montgomery his retirement is
not too far away that state was good
enough for inhe and long on yeah it's
certainly good enough for the likes of
me
alright ms i me congrats to love horse
winning the World Cup that was the
fastest month in my life seems like that
Russia KS a match was only yesterday
four more years to wait till the 2022
World Cup opener on November 21st 2022
thanks for stopping by everyone trust me
when I say there's more where this came
from coming your way sooner or later
Laszlo Montgomery signing off from the
capital of Southern California the city
of Los Angeles do consider joining me
again next time for another exciting
episode of a China history podcast
you